---
title: "PHL245 Review"
date: 2023-06-15
---

* TOC
{:toc}

# Arguments

An *argument* has one or more *premises* and one *conclusion*.

Denoted by
$$P_1, P_2, \ldots \therefore C$$.

## Statements

Premises and conclusions must be *statements*: sentences that are
true/false.

## Validity

An argument is *valid* if and only if there is no possibility where
the premises are true and the conclusion is false.

## Soundness

An argument is *sound* if and only if it is valid and all its premises
are true.

# Propositional logic

## Form

Validity is a matter of form. Any argument of the same form is valid.

## Logical connectives

| Symbol | Name | Meaning |
|-|-|-|
| $$\neg$$ | negation | not |
| $$\wedge$$ | conjunction | and |
| $$\vee$$ | disjunction | or |
| $$\implies$$ | conditional | if ... then ... |
| $$\iff$$ | biconditional | if and only if |

# Symbolization

## Symbolization key

| Letter | Statement |
|-|-|

## Atomic sentences

Any sentence that doesn't contain a connective will be symbolized with a letter.

## Symbols

Propositional logic contains three kinds of symbols:

- Atomic sentences
- Connectives
- Brackets

## Expression

An *expression* is any combination of symbols.

## Sentence

A *sentence* is an expression defined as follows:

1. Atomic sentences are sentences.
2. If $$\phi$$ is a sentence, then so is $$\neg \phi$$.
3. If $$\phi$$ and $$\psi$$ are sentences, then so are
    - $$(\phi \wedge \psi)$$
    - $$(\phi \vee \psi)$$
    - $$(\phi \implies \psi)$$
    - $$(\phi \iff \psi)$$

## Main connective

The *main connective* of a sentence is the last one that is added in
building up that sentence.

## Arguments

We use $$P \therefore C$$ to symbolize an argument.

(TBD)

# Predicate Logic

Motivation: there are valid arguments that cannot be expressed in propositional logic.

Many sentences have the form of subject-predicate.
Example:

- `a`: Alice
- `L(x)`: `x` is a logician
- `L(a)`: Alice is a logician

## Quantifiers

| Name | Symbol | Meaning |
|-|-|-|
| Existential Quantifier | $$\exists$$, E | `ExL(x)`: someone has property `L` |
| Universal Quantifier | $$\forall$$, A | `AxL(x)`: everyone has property `L` |

## Identity

| Name | Symbol | Meaning |
|-|-|-|
| Identity | = | Two variables are the same |

## Sentences

An *expression* is any combination of symbols.

An *atomic formula* is either in form of `P(t1, ..., tn)` or `t1 = t2`.

A *formula* is defined recursively:

1. Rules from predicate logic
2. If `φ` is a formula and `x` is a variable, then `Axφ` is a formula.
3. If `φ` is a formula and `x` is a variable, then `Exφ` is a formula.

The *main logical operator* of a formula is the last operator introduced.

The *scope* of a logical operator is the sub-formula(s) for which it is the
main logical operator.

A variable is *bound* if it occurs within the scope of a quantifier with that
variable.

A *sentence* is any formula with no free variables.
